# CSE 5311-002 - Hands On 12, HW17
## Question
Given a dynamic table that doubles in size when it needs more space, find the amoritized runtime for inserting n elements.
1. Use the aggregate method
2. Use the accounting method

## Introduction
### __Insertion__<br />
   Pseudo-code
 ```
1  insert(index, value):
2     if count == capacity:
3        expand()
4     insert value at index
5     count++
 ```
Assuming that the array has empty space, the cost for inserting an element is O(1). <br />
However, if the array is full, the array needs to create space by expanding as shown in line 3.
### __Expansion__<br/>
Pseudo-code
 ```
1  expand():
2     allocate new array of size 2*capacity
3     copy elements from old array to new array
4     free old array
5     array = new array
6     capacity = 2*capacity
 ```
For expanding the array all the elements need to be copied to the new array. This operation take $n-1$ steps (1 for each element copied). <br />
The expansion only happens when $n-1$ is a power of 2. <br />
### __Cost__<br />
The cost of the ith operation therefore is:
```math
\begin{equation} c_i=
\begin{cases} 1 & 
\text{if } i \text{ is not a power of 2} \\ i & \text{if } i \text{ is a power of 2}
\end{cases}
\end{equation}
```
The array will double its size at 1, 2, 4, 8, ..., up to $n$. <br />
So the total cost of the doublings wil be $1 + 2 + 4 + 8 + ... + n = 2n - 1$ <br /><br />
Below we analyze the cost of the ith operation using the aggregate method and the accounting method.

   
## __Aggregate Method__
$$T(n) = \sum_{i=1}^{n} c_i \leq n + \sum_{j=0}^{\lfloor{\log n}\rfloor} 2^j$$<br />
$$< n + 2n$$<br />
$$= 3n$$<br />
So the amortized cost of the $n$ operations is bounded by $3n$. Therefore the amortized cost of each operation is $3$.


## __Accounting Method__
In the accounting method we assign a cost to each operation that is more than the actual cost. <br />
The actual cost of the ith operation is $c_i$ and the amortized cost of the ith operation is $a_i$. <br />
The difference between the amortized cost and the actual cost is the credit or debit which is saved for future operations in our 'bank'. <br />
We assume that each insertion operation has a cost of 3, one for the insertion and two for the expansion (Moving themselves and moving any other element due to their movement, which has already moved once). <br />
For each insertion operation that an expansion is NOT needed we have: $$c_{ins}=a_i-c_i = 3-1 = 2$$ in our bank. <br />
For each insertion operation that an expansion is needed we have: $$c_{exp}=a_i-c_i = 3-(i-1) = 4-i$$. <br />
But an expansion happens only when i is a power of 2. So for each expansion $\lfloor{\frac{i-1}{2}}\rfloor$ insertions have happened. <br />
Therefore the total cost of the ith operation is:
So the total cost of insertions between expansions is: 
$$\Rightarrow c_{tot}=(i-1-\frac{i-1}{2})\cdot c_{ins}+c_{exp}$$<br />
$$\Rightarrow c_{tot}=(i-1-\frac{i-1}{2})\cdot 2+(4-i)$$<br />
$$\Rightarrow c_{tot}=2(\frac{i-1}{2})+(4-i)$$<br />
$$\Rightarrow c_{tot}=i-1+4-i$$<br />
$$\Rightarrow c_{tot}=3$$
Therefore, we maintain a positive balance in our bank and the amortized cost of each operation is 3, as assumed.

## Conclusion
The amortized cost of inserting n elements in a dynamic array that doubles in size when it needs more space is 3.<br />
This is verified with both the aggregate method and the accounting method.








## Citations
1. Thomas H. Cormen, Charles E. Leiserson, Ronald L. Rivest, Clifford Stein. Introduction to Algorithms, 3rd Edition. The MIT Press, 2009. ISBN: 978-0-262-03384-8.